I may or may not be about to be live
streaming on YouTube we'll see if this
works it was a different flow than I've
ever done before
hey I just got a notice from YouTube
saying that it is live streaming huzzah
then it works hi world awesome so I
guess I'm the host for July I wasn't the
host last week because I was on a plane
I'm coming back from Barcelona so
because I didn't really line up a
speaker I'm just going to give a
represent the presentation I gave at the
ipfs Meetup
that was in Barcelona a couple days
before ipfs camp and I released a new
version to Pierre pad so that's what I'm
gonna show go to my sides okay and can
everybody see this oh I have to share
the screen
you
okay don't know how to get rid of this
thing here okay okay this again okay can
everybody see that
yes yeah I'm going to assume everybody
can
okay so Pierre pad and pure base
building collaborative apps using IP FS
+ CR DTS
so pew pad net it's a project that's
been around at protocol labs for about a
year and a half it was originally
started by Pedro Teixeira and it's a
collaborative markdown editor if you've
ever used a system such as Google Docs
or etherpad it's very fairly similar to
them bunch of people can log in at once
in edit something so here's a screenshot
collaborative real-time markdown
encrypted so I think I'm gonna just give
a quick demo of this so I have it loaded
here and if you look if you type in peer
pad net oops or gateways having in this
series now if you remove the s and HTTP
it'll work just fine
well yeah or not okay I haven't loaded
in a different web browser okay
let's go here and basically you can
click on this little symbol here alright
we just really really stood quickly and
used to have a landing page and the
landing page but the landing page will
come back soon with some more brandy and
it's just markdown editor but in your
title here there's a no document title
loaded and you know it's you know is
markdown
can take other things you can do
markdown so and if you want to work on a
document with someone else you just copy
copy the URL and paste give it to
somebody say over chat
and then you can see take the
so you can see whatever you type the
other person will see and that's Rick so
that's basically what it is I'll go back
to my slides
and Pierre the collaborative editor was
basically built as a demonstration for a
programming technique which uses a data
structure called CR DT which stands for
conflict free pre replicated data types
and Pedro built a library called peer
base which allows you to combine these
data structures which may make it really
easy to build the sort of real time
collaborative applications and run them
in your web browser but using the IP FS
primitives for all your network
communication so this library is called
peer base and also to
Oh sugar here okay the here's the
webpage for it it has written in
JavaScript runs a new browser also runs
it no GS so you can use this in
server-side thoughts and Pinterest and
things you might want to write that
would run in a server that would also
collaborate in work work together in a
collaboration the parts of it doesn't
use all of ifs it uses primarily limb
p2p for all the network communication
and WebSockets and it also uses IP FS
pub/sub for gossip so when you start
document other people want to are on
there a different web browser they want
to collaborate on the same document they
have to sort of rendezvous and find
somehow and it uses IP FS pub sub
channels so you can run ipfs in your web
browser when pure bass starts up it like
pure pure pad has a pure pad pub sub
channel and anyway that starts a pure
pad up he goes into this pub sub channel
and it's like hey I want to edit this
document and this somebody might be in
there already say oh what we're already
editing that document and then they
basically join up it's a bit like a chat
channel and then once they do that
they're a bunch of data structures that
they used to maintain connections with
each other right now it uses WebSockets
and a library called WebSockets tar to
in order to get through firewalls
because web browsers are unable to run
TCP sockets which is what ipfs uses they
can't listen on a connection so they
have to talk to a central point there's
also some support and Lib p2p for using
WebRTC so they would still need to be a
centralized signaling server but then
they could talk directly peer-to-peer
but we haven't set that went up in
pearpad yeah
so pure bass has several other the
example apps that people have built with
it so Moxie studio built something
called discussed by which is a browser
extension and it uses pure base to allow
people to go to any web page and you can
log in and you can comment on what's on
the web page and have a little
discussion thread and that's available
in I think Chrome and Firefox app store
so just a true discuss if I we built
actually one Bennett he the CEO of
clinical labs he built a chess game that
uses pure base so you can it's more for
more than just collaborative editors and
or file coin I'm making an experimental
text client that uses pure base that
allows you to negotiate deals with other
file claim miners and store your files
so CRT T's C or D T stands for conflict
fleet pre replicated data types and they
were introduced in this paper from 2011
and they it's the structure for apps
that sink that it was really great you
can have multiple writers there's no
leader and if once everybody syncs
together everybody will see the same
document so there's a visualizer here
that I'm going to show you which I can
sort of show how they work
Playa haters so this is a from an CDT
visualizer the Lorenzen web browser from
the antidote DB project and this one
they have several on here I'm just going
to show the simplest one which is a CR
DP counter and you can see how three
different replicas or you can think of
them as different clients you know who
is in the web browser would be three
different people in three different web
browsers and it implements a counter so
if I click here you can see incremented
and the state here is one so if I add
another one
stateless now to see oh yeah okay States
not three and then the community this
replica knows this there's the counter
is now three but the other replicas it
hasn't talked to the other ones yet so
you can simulate message passing here so
you can draw in there and you can see
the state is now three and then if this
one is to increment the counter the
state is now four and this one knows
nothing so you could do this one let's
get it
and uh wait doesn't okay that sort of
thing they then you know if everything
secret synchronize us together
everything's gonna have the same state
that's basically what's their duties do
they it's really great for offline
multiple device type of applications to
be typical what you'd find in modern
mobile apps today that need to
synchronize with web pages and whatnot
so
so there are several different types of
CID teas the the original paper in 2011
introduced two different styles of CRD
teas
one was called state-based CRD teas and
the other one that's called Operation
VCR Haiti's state-based work by copying
the entire state from one replica to
another and but that works good if you
stay this small but if your state is
really large that can be a large amount
of data to move operation base CR DT is
worked by recording each and every
little action that you do and then just
synchronizing the individual what they
call operations over which is really
efficient for things like collaborative
text editors where you making lots lots
of little changes and synchronizes lots
of little ones but they they have the
drawback in that when you just first
synchronize it you got to play back
every operation could beginning a time
and there could be like tens of
thousands even like a million operations
and that could take take a really long
time so they both have pros and cons
Delta CR DTS was a follow on paper which
was an attempt to find sort of a middle
ground where he has sort of good
properties of both models so Pedro
implement the paper and implemented a
JavaScript library which implements
these and you can find this at this
github page and there's many when you
use a CR DT it's a little bit different
programming model for programmers you
got you have to pick your type ahead of
time and by picking your type your also
picking like how it resolves conflicts
and things and this library has many
different types sets counters registers
arrays and maps so when you build a pure
base application that uses Delta C or D
tease you you model you have to model
you have your data structure first and
you have to pick your data you what sort
of types you're going to use
so cm time check here ya got 20 minutes
so I have a home automation demo which
I'm not going to go show it because it's
just running at a time but it's at light
starch and picked calm and if I connect
to it with multiple web browsers I can
toggle lights on and off and there's
some source code here which is I'm
probably going to turn this into the
hello world app for for a pure base
because it's much much simpler than
what's currently listed thing now so in
addition to pure base which you see pure
pad this is just a static react es app
and it's just you generate the static
file and you upload it to ipfs and
Peapod net is just a hosted on the
public IP FS gateway and we've just
mapped the domain name on to that so
it's completely static there's no server
side apart from the WebSocket server
that we talked about previously but we
did it do have another service that's
hooked up to this is called a pin er so
when I'm typing things in
you can see here it says will save soon
and if it's working it says saved so if
I flip over I can there's no user
interface on the printer but you can see
I this Pinner is running on Heroku and
it's joined there every single LP pad
collaboration so if you click down here
one of these will be the Pinner and as I
type there's that there's about a 20
second delay it'll it'll try to save it
and now I can shut this browser down
shared the link with somebody somebody
else somewhere in different time zone
can get that link and open it up and
even though my browser isn't open you
can see that the data here was pinned
and it's pinning all the data into ipfs
cluster and we're running ipfs cluster
that which is collecting all these all
every document is encrypted so the the
data that's on the cluster the we can't
read it but the people collaborating on
the apps can can so so
that's what the paneer does
and we're doing peer bases in the only
CR DT project happening at protocol labs
dr. San Juan from the ipfs cluster team
has built a system called Merkel C or D
T's which stores very similar data
structures but it's storing them in IPL
D which has potential to support very
very large potentially very very large
data structures which is very very
interesting and I encourage you to go
read the paper
there's we're also protocol labs is also
providing a research grant to Viktor
Khristenko who is at ipfs camp
I got hanging out with him a bit and
he's working on something called
replicated object notation which is
another CR DT he's actually been doing
CRD T's almost as long as C or D T's
have been around in other over on the
dot side of things I previously worked
on a project called a hyper merge which
takes the auto merge CR DT from Martin
clapman and runs it on that that
theoretically could run on ipfs as well
but there's a lot of people doing some
interesting things with that library and
there's a lot of other prior art with CR
DTS people built like a lot of this work
came out of work that was done to put
these their duties in the react database
and there's a follow-on project called
antidote DB which has some uses some of
the same data
CR DT data structures and akka
distributed data actor system for from
Scala this also has some of these in it
so that's it so I like to anybody has
any questions I can
can do that now
I do it I do have a question
I quit to question but you already had
one so my question is are the operations
right now described on equality the
Pinner is storing data using IP LD but
the in the web browser there it doesn't
use IP LD so that's so interesting
because I'm not really understanding
what that is possible like so if the
peanut doesn't know the key to decipher
and if the operations are sent not as I
feel the objects then how can the peener
without knowing which operations are
there converging to like create the
states that then get spins as I killed
me so the pillar the pillar is limited
in that it's only dealing with encrypted
blobs so it's not it doesn't get a lot
of information it just basically gets
the name at the document and then he
gets these sort of encrypted blobs and
it's got it's got to store those so it's
my initial attempt with the Pinner was I
really wanted to like sort of try to
store sort of like Merkel C or D T's and
store all the information but you can't
because it's all encrypted so it's it
doesn't really have any information so
so it's basically just storing so with
Delta C or D T's it can work with like
the full state of the document which is
basically everything that's in the
document or it can work with the little
deltas we've decided to only deal with
full state so every that's why we don't
pin continuously only pin every like
minute or so and we just put the whole
state into the into ipfs cluster thing
that's intriguing me they don't
understand so like if you'd storing all
the operations all the deltas then then
I could touch to the user to the new
browser to kind of like just receive all
of those operations and and resolve the
like converge the states locally but but
like if the peener
is getting if the pinning is getting
effectively snapshots of the state then
what is telling the Pinner what is the
weighted snapshot like is there a
converse
in between the browser saying like oh I
just converts the state I converge yeah
so if you have like two people editing
document at the same time they both have
the private keys so they're sending the
little individual deltas back and forth
to each other but the Pinner is just
taking a snapshot every once in a while
it's just basically so it's the backup
it's like if those two people go offline
and then they send the link to a third
person third person comes online they
have to get the statement someone and
the regional two people aren't online
anymore so the pinners role is to grab
the state which would have been saved
into ipfs cluster so to rehydrate that
and send this encrypted blob to this the
third person and then they can go edit
it make their changes their changes can
go back to the Pinner and then when the
other two people come back online they
can get there so so this is kind of like
a growing ball or like encrypted cipher
text right like over time what the
Pinner is doing is like whatever is
happening on on this document
it just keeps like smashing more and
then it's up to the new clients to kind
of like just spread this ball of things
and just power that and then I just
figure out how to pay so it's all these
pieces together yeah yeah I think for it
works well for pure pad documents cuz
they tend to be you know small documents
of the text but you know if you're doing
like there's a much more elaborate data
structure that might be like potentially
much much much larger you might want to
change the pinned around so that it
could save all the encrypted deltas as
well but it doesn't really have a lot of
ability like you can't merge the
encrypted state with encrypted Delta so
we just have to keep all these like
little Delta's around and then but it
could potentially do that it I think it
was a simplifying assumption just to
like not worry about that particular use
case is it's not something that's needed
right now
I didn't go anything yeah I don't know
if you've got time for this really but
I'm not sure if I fully understand it
does the Pinner has to then join every
document to be able to read to rehydrate
yes so it's basically the the gossip
channel the pub/sub channel and every
single so the Pinner is listening to
every single peer pad document ever but
it like it only listens to it for like a
minute or two then if there's no
activity it drops off so like it's it's
really only has to listen to the live
set of documents so but like everybody
that's using the public peer pad we'll
all like say hey here's my document in
this public channel so there's a little
bit a little bit of a privacy thing
there like the thing is the names of the
documents are just like a random thing
and the contents of the document is
random so it's there's not there's not
not a really big privacy problem there
but yeah but you see but they are sort
of globally broadcast hey this document
is live right now yeah okay so it's the
pinna went offline you and everybody
else went offline also then would the
document be lost forever potentially but
what the the document is also saved in
your local browser
indexeddb so even if the pin is sort of
flaky as long as you're online and the
person's on at the same time you don't
really need the pin early you would
still like the one critical part that
must stay on line is the the WebSocket
server so potentially we can use WebRTC
but we'd still need a signaling server
which would be like a smaller thing so
WebSocket server everything all the
traffic gets sent to the central hub and
then
goes out so with the WebRTC potentially
the packets could go directly from web
browser to web browser but you'd still
have to have fall backs that were
centralized it's it adds more complexity
eventually the hope is that this there'd
be a rendezvous protocol implemented in
ipfs in the p2p which could take away
some of the some centralization but then
we could maybe use circuit relay some
like your people had IPF a secret
circuit really turned on and it could
avoid the whole WebSocket business we'd
still be WebSockets but you know more
there just be like a whole bunch of
servers out there that you could connect
to and they would be like when
specialized when hardwired into your
applications
you
and to be dusting WebRTC signaling over
Bluetooth I yeah I think like it'd be
really great if this could work offline
so that work hasn't been done yet so it
yeah so the times running a very fun
unhappier yeah the problem we're working
in a web browser environment and web
browsers are limited lydell's been doing
awesome work with ipfs companion and
brave which sorta can open up some of
these possibilities to actually work
offline
I guess we're over time so let's call
that and see you next week thank you Jim
you